# Compliance in the Cloud - Security for Non-Engineers
When people talk about the cloud, they often highlight the benefits - the ability to scale effectively and cheaply, the promise of “always available” data centers distributed across the world, etc. The reality is, however, that for everything the cloud makes easier, there are many things that are in fact made more difficult. One of these domains that are made more difficult in cloud computing is ensuring compliance with various legal requirements and edicts from international organizations.

These issues do not always have technical solutions, either - there is a certain percentage of developers who would argue that proper technological systems negate much of this difficulty. While this is true when negating development issues with compliance, there are often many overlooked areas in compliance that require non-technical solutions. Let’s look at a few of them now.
## Chain of Command Compliance
One of the most common and glaring oversights when it comes to ensuring compliance for a multitude of legal and ethical constraints is establishing a chain of command, and ensuring compliance throughout. Just because you are compliant while data is generated and then later while it is stored, that doesn’t mean that the data is secure throughout. There have been multiple compliance issues in 2018 that have proven this - big data leaks from medical providers often originate not from their own compliance chain, but from data that is sent to third party vendors and partners.

Accordingly, organizations should ensure that compliance is met at every step of the data lifecycle. When data is generated, it should be generated in accordance with a compliance policy for all known applicable legal strictures. When data is stored, the same should hold true. At every step between those two points, however, the data should be subjected to the same rigorous standards. Every time data is worked upon, it should be considered an “activity” - every single activity should thus be done in line with compliance orders and standards, even if the activity in question is as minor as backing up a file.

Consider this to be an organizational method for ensuring compliance - implement it into your workflow, and make it a required part of every transaction and activity.
## Management Compliance
A chain is only as strong as its weakest link, and unfortunately, this weak link is often the result of poor training or understanding of compliance topics. Organizations may think that their data is secure, but if a manager mistakenly believes that some data is not covered by HIPAA or other privacy laws while it indeed is supposed to be, this could lead to issues which grow over time. Likewise, this misunderstanding can then flow down to the workforce, creating a culture of non-security and non-compliance.

The solution is simple - adequate managerial and workforce training. There is a reason that every major organization in the tech space does mandatory yearly training, and just being a “start-up” or “modern” organization doesn’t preclude one from benefiting from such training. 

Implementing an adequate managerial training program and ensuring that the workforce is properly trained in unison is a managerial solution that should be applied to any organization handling sensitive data.
## Customer Experience and Education
Likewise, many compliance issues can in fact arise from customer miseducation and poor user experience. For instance, if a user has the inability to roll back changes to stored data, they might instead choose to copy that data, creating duplicate files containing sensitive information. If this data is then moved from secure server to non-secure server due to poor design, the data will be by definition non-compliant.

This can be handled in a variety of ways depending on the type of compliance issue your organization might face. First and foremost, you can ensure that you are properly sequestering your data in a technical approach. While this is outside the scope of this article, it is a good first building step. Next, ensure that you have tools that the consumer wants, so that issues like copying content or making public content that should not be public is prevented. Finally, provide ample education and training materials in the form of documentation and tutorials to your userbase - proper education will negate most of these concerns.

This solution should be considered an educational one more than anything else. It can also be termed a “User Experience” concern, and should be managed by the proper design and UX staff to ensure proper coverage.
## C-Level Training and Auditing
At the other end of the spectrum, the C-level staff can likewise by damaging to your compliance. Because many C-level staff, that is CEO, CTO, etc., may need to access sensitive information as part of their daily function, they have greater potential for damage due to their elevated access to materials. Something as simple as commenting on the proclivity for certain patients of a medical institution to use a certain pharmacy in an email may be a breach of medical data protections if that data were to leave the protected network and end up in a third party vendor database.

Accordingly, beyond the technical restrictions that can be applied, proper C-Level understanding is paramount. The biggest solution in this space is to simply appoint a Privacy and Compliance C-level staff member. They can lead education, sure, but they can also set the pace and culture of the organization. Additional safeguards can be put in place, but ensuring that the culture of privacy and compliance is set at the C-level is an effective staffing solution to this problem.
## Proper Tooling
Finally, while this might be considered a technical solution, the best thing an organization can do to ensure compliance is to ensure that proper tooling is considered within the proper context. Often, organizations will use a given solution largely because it has been used before, because a C-level staffer is familiar with it, or because the partner is affiliated in some other context. This is not an effective method of choosing tooling, and should not be considered acceptable.

First, a framework for what makes a proper tool should be considered. These tools should have a long-term, proven success rate and a resistance against breaches. These tools should also be focused specifically on the compliance issues at hand. Secondly, each tool should go through a private audit, both for user experience and for actual compliance, before it is ever implemented.

This is a framework solution, and it should govern all inclusion of tools in your greater system. Using an automated system like Cloudsploit can go a long way towards ensuring you are complying with the vast regulatory body that data is subjected to. Whether it’s HIPAA, PCI-DSS, or the GDPR, one of the fundamental requirements of any data processing body is to secure your systems in a reasonable and effective manner - accordingly, choosing the proper tools from the get-go is vitally important.
## Conclusion
Compliance is not an impossibility - it is made more difficult by these circumstances, yes, but it is not impossible. With the proper solutions in place and adequate training to drive its implementers, compliance can be ensured in even the most private of data sets and server environments.
